# The Strange Case of the Rogue HP-12c

2024-09-09

"That's a non-trivial computation"
- Prof Kahan on the time-value of money calculation

I never really understood the plethora of financial calculators until an unfortunate combination of my fixed-rate mortgage period ending and Liz Truss happening converged to drive a sudden interest in the 'time value of money' (TVM).  A TVM solver is demonstrated twice in the HP-42s manuals as an illustratory example program.  Unfortunately, it didn't perform all that well from either an accuracy nor a user-interface angle.  In attempting to improve this program, I found that slight changes could easily introduce significant regressions, and the need for some good tests became apparent.

Reading all I could on TVM solving, collecting example problems from here and there, and making some of my own, I finally constructed a battery of 13 TVM problems that tested edge-case solves to push the limits of the TVM solver.  With the help of others from the HP museum and Swiss micros forums, I set about testing as many financial calculators as I could find, learning a lot about their design as a result.

But that is another story.  The HP-12c is the most iconic of all financial calculators.  It is probably the longest-running production calculator, starting life in 1981.  It was not their first financial device, and Hewlett-Packard (HP) by this point had refined their TVM solver to such heights, that HP-12c developed an enviable reputation as the 'de-facto' financial calculator.  The calculator was written into high-value contracts[1], with the expectation that these machines would return the exact same answer into continuity.

In order to maintain this reputation, HP have taken meticulous care in porting their code across several electronic platforms necessary to span 40+ years of production.

## An Intriguing Reddit Post 

Earlier this year, I came across what looked like a fairly benign reddit post describing some difficulty changing the decimal point to a decimal comma on a new Brazilian-bought HP-12c.  Most of the replies were along the lines of 'you're holding it wrong', but others chimed saying that they had experienced the same issue with a Brazilian-bought HP-12c.  It pointed to feedback on Amazon awash with complaints describing not only this issue, but also a specific issue with calculating something called the 'Internal Return Rate' (IRR).

While it is generally accepted that the HP-12c (and to some degree the related HP-12c Platinum) will return exactly the same results no matter when the model was made, given there were already two differences in the way it functioned, I was curious to see if there were any differences in its TVM solver.  Using the aforementioned battery of tests as a forensic examination of the solver, a helpful redditor recorded results which were almost entirely different to either the HP-12c, HP-12 Platinum, or for that matter, any other of the tested financial calculators we got our collective hands on.

This was hard to explain.  The results were close enough to exclude user-error.  The natural inclination was to suspect a fake device, something which is rife in the world of modern Casio calculators.  However, fake HP-12c's have not clearly been documented in the wild, and with the help of a VPN and profuse use of google-translate, I found not only Amazon reviews describing these issues, but verified reviews on HP's official Brazil website describing the two bugs despite multiple returns.

## What The Results Tell Us

One puzzle actually devised by Prof Kahan and is known as 'a penny for your thoughts'.  If you saved 1 penny every second for a year, in an account with an interest rate of 10%, how much would have by the end of the year?  This is a 'solve-for-future-value' problem, and is especially difficult for a couple of reasons.  The first is that the TVM equation raises the periodic interest rate plus one, to the power of the number of payments.  The periodic interea st rate here is very small and the number of payments (more then 31 million), very high.  The addition of 1 to a very small number rapidly loses information due to the internal floating point representation of the number.  Small interest rates can rapidly cause problems with unoptimised algorithms, and in fact the earliest financial calculator, the HP-80, was erroneous enough for money to be lost deposited in saving, despite receiving a small (positive) interest rate.

The HP-12c 'comma' (as I have taken to calling it) returned a result here of 331666.9849, from a true result of 331667.00669‥ giving it an accuracy between the HP-70 (1974) and HP-22 (1975), but far off the 10 digit precision of the HP-12c and 12 digit precision of the HP-12c Precision.

Another second puzzle attempts to solve for an interest rate of 0.  For unoptimised algorithms, this can cause some real problems, as the interest rate cannot be solved algebraically.  Instead, to 'solve-for-i' you need an iterative approach, and this can run into some problems as i gets close to zero.  Again, the HP-80 fails on this, but it can also be a surprising fail on far more modern devices.  The HP-12c comma is unable to return a result on this one, whereas the HP-12c and HP-12c Platinum will at least return a result close to zero.

An investment of $50 upfront, and $400 after 10 years, returns $30 on a yearly basis.  This would be a very unusual arrangement, and fittingly, there is an unusual answer when solving for an interest rate that would balance this.  There are two possible answers, one result around 14.4% and another 53.2%.  No HP financial calculator (and a few others) will attempt to return a result on this, but strangely, the HP-12c comma gives us 14.44‥, a result accurate to over 8 decimal places.

Putting this all together, we can only conclude that the entire TVM solver has been completely re-implemented for this device.

## So What Happened?

The strange thing is that the HP-12c ROM is fairly easy to obtain these days, whether you are HP or not.  So why write a new solver from scratch?  Through a very helpful Brazilian person who had one of these devices, I was able to get hold of one to verify the machine.  Since then, HP have admitted that these devices were sold officially, but haven't given any further details.  They are presumably in the clean-up phase of what is potentially a very damaging failure to manage the brand of the HP-12c.  We can only speculate as to why someone would have written this firmware, and also how it got onto these devices.  For more straight-forward answers, the HP-12c comma returns very similar results to a regular HP-12c.  In fact, it retains a quirk of the HP-12c in the 'solve-for-N' returns an integer result.  This is unusual because no other HP financial calculator (other than the HP-12c Platinum) and none others that I tested show this behaviour.  So clearly, the firmware was developed to appear like a regular HP-12c.  It's also unclear how many of these devices got out into the wild and whether they will get recalled, and whether all of this will allow the HP-12c to continue its reputation as the de-facto financial calculator.


[1] https://www.alphr.com/technology/1001717/the-rebirth-of-the-hp-12c-how-one-man-reimagined-a-calculator-from-1981/
